hey everyone Laszlo Montgomery here my
travels all behind me today I wanted to
zoom in on the birth of us-china
relations
not official diplomatic relations but
the time when these two nations first
got together and saw each other up close
so let's get right into it
in a nutshell the American colonies
declared their independence from Great
Britain on July 4th 1776 the seven years
later on September 3rd 1783 the Treaty
of Paris was signed at Versailles that
among other things ended the
Revolutionary War and with that like
with South Sudan in July 2011 there was
a brand new country on the world map the
United States of America and just like
any other country must do when they
become independent the u.s. had to go
forth into the world and you know get
the word out now over in the Forbidden
City in Beijing they had no clue what
was going on when those assembled at
Independence Hall on July 4th 1776 were
inking their names to the Declaration it
was right about the halfway point in the
chin long era of the ching dynasty the
dynasty in china was really peaking
about now this was imperial china's last
hurrah from here on out it's gonna be
all downhill for the for the ching
dynasty our former colonial masters the
British had been trading with China for
quite a long time the honor of ol East
India Company was founded in the year
1600 and thanks to their efforts the
finest in Chinese exports made their way
from the city of Guangzhou called Canton
back then to the homes of all British
subjects including those residing in the
American colonies but because of the
monopoly granted to the East India
Company no direct foreign trade was
permitted between the colonies and in
any foreign nation
if you lived in Baltimore Richmond and
wanted the city or by some lacquerware
you had to get it from England English
traders handled all the direct trade
with China and the Far East if you saw
an object on someone's mantelpiece and
Delaware and it said Made in China it
got there via England not only America's
founding fathers but their fathers as
well we're all aware that there was this
country called China and it was far away
and it was exotic beyond description
they knew China produced you know the
silks that were all the rage throughout
the empire and it was from China that
all the tea they consumed without end
came from they love this stuff back in
the American colonies no less than
anyone else loved it
tea of course had grabbed hold of
everyone and it was just as popular then
as it is today and the other things that
the porcelain items the silk garments
and accessories many people were
mesmerised with the beauty of these
things and you know if the items were
within their means think they had to
possess it these Chinese imports were
something that people of the American
colonies might adorn themselves with on
special occasions or display in their
parlor or above their heart that might
give off a width of the exotic and
remind them of that faraway place of
Legends some of the colonists might have
read the tales of Marco Polo or had read
a little bit about China you know here
and there but for the most part during
the colonial period in the US China was
a land that no one knew much about but
they knew it was there the beauty of the
objects they saw that had come from
China intrigued Western people as much
as they intrigued the the sogdians back
in the Han Dynasty not only these
imported goods but chinoiserie as well
was all the rage chinoiserie you know
took Chinese motifs and blended them
with Western shapes and design
to create a new kind of style and first
glance it looked in a paired Chinese but
upon closer inspection you know you'll
see some Western element added that you
know gives it away if there was a year
that marks a line of demarcation between
China the legendary place and China the
actual place that would have to be 1735
that was the year description devasena
was published in four volumes the author
was Jean Baptiste to hold this book
freely available on the Google was
translated into many languages and we in
our little china history podcast
community know it as do halls general
history of china up until this seminal
work was released for general
consumption pretty much anyone who knew
anything about china had read it in
worste cello's best-known work about
Marco Polo's travels or alleged travels
if you subscribe to the venerable
Francis woods viewpoint there was no
definitive work that neatly articulate
Lee and with such depth and scholarship
presented China and Chinese culture to
the West with this newly published work
it spawned a whole generation of China
experts and scholars both professional
and amateur to hold who lived from 1674
to 1743 came out with this general
history of China right in the middle of
the Renaissance Voltaire was 41 years
old and Montesquieu 46 Isaac Newton had
only been gone for eight years so if you
can picture the times and who was around
back then we can all agree this was a
pretty good an opportune moment in
history for something like this general
history of China to be published now at
last
Western people could sort of put their
nose up against the glass and peer
inside and read about descriptions of
all these amazing things that up to now
had only been privy to the Jesuits and
you know those who were their allies now
last in 1735 when George Washington was
three years old and still had years to
go before he cut down that cherry tree
jean-baptiste Duhalde gave the world his
masterpiece matteo ricci 'he's history
of the christian expedition 1608 to 1610
shed some light on China but it only as
it related to the Jesuit mission in 1665
there was Yan ooh Hoffs accounts and
Dutch that told of his travels in China
in the earliest years of the Qing
Dynasty it was entitled collection of
voyages as the Embassy of the Dutch East
Indies company to the great tartarean
Cham the present emperor of China when
Thomas Jefferson was living in France
his closest friend and the man who
followed him into the White House James
Madison father of the Constitution had
written and told him he must buy do
old's book and bring it back to the
States
Jefferson and Madison had both read it
Benjamin Franklin had read it do old's
book made the rounds and that class of
people who read these kinds of things
all read it or knew someone that did it
was one of those books it was America's
first chance to scratch beneath the
surface and see what China was sort of
all about do old's book was also
published in a premium version that was
entitled the general history of China
containing a geographical historical
chronological political and physical
description of the Empire of China
Chinese tartar II Korea and Tibet and
the preface of the book begins quote as
China is the most remarkable of all
countries yet known the English reader
must be greatly pleased to find the
exact 'test account of it that has ever
yet appeared in our language and the
punchline to all of this is that too old
he never even went to China but he did
talk to seventeen guys that did all
Jesuits of course they always had the
inside track and these seventeen Jesuits
upon their return to the continent at
the end of their service regurgitated
everything they knew from all their
collective years in China and in dealing
with the Chinese then two old took all
this information organized it and
condensed it and put it all in this book
in 1687 the works of Confucius first
appeared in Latin effect in 1733 a
friend of Benjamin Franklin acquired a
set of the Wu Chi and the SU shoe the
five classics and the four books that
you know made up the core of classical
Chinese philosophy during the period of
the American enlightenment that lasted
from about the birth of Franklin and
1706 to the death of Jefferson in 1826
Confucius really got put on a pedestal
in the colonies and after independence
the Great Sage was already viewed in a
positive light and you know as this
symbol of moral rectitude Benjamin
Franklin published excerpts from
Confucius in his Pennsylvania Gazette
among his many accomplishments Franklin
is also called the first American Sign a
file besides this there were many
scholarly discourses and essays floating
around and a whole bunch of magazines
and pamphlets of the day Thomas
Jefferson greatly admired Chinese
culture and attempted to weave parts of
it into the fabric of the culture of
this new nation that he was one of the
many cofounders of in particular there
was architecture and in how he designed
his gardens at Monticello
he loved to blend Chinese elements
together with the Italian architecture
that he so loved Voltaire had written
later the Chinese for 4,000 years when
we were unable even to read new
everything essentially useful of which
we boast at the present day you know in
the 1780s several Americans with
pretensions to literary Fame wrote these
kind of travel logs of their days spent
in the merchants trade in China remind
you China for any foreigner prior to
1841 meant Canton ever since 1757 all
trade
been restricted to that place only and
that's how it stayed for 85 years until
the opium war sort of whacked the pinata
and added a few more holes this was the
first time mid 1700s that China trade
mania arrived in the West American
merchants traders I'd that place and
wish they could get a piece of that
market but as long as America was a
colony of Britain forget it all American
ships had to stay out of China the East
India Company held the monopoly for all
trade uh-huh but not anymore not after
the Treaty of Paris by September of 1783
China was fair game big a free and
independent country meant the United
States didn't have to put up with the
EEI seized monopoly now at last they
could freely and legally sail their
ships from Boston or New York or from
wherever and sailed directly to China to
become fresh meat for the hop oh and the
Quahog and Canton now that the newly
created United States of America was
free to get around the EIC monopoly
didn't mean adventurous traders could
just get up and head to Guangzhou this
was a very very expensive endeavor
massively expensive and risky too even
in the late 18th century sailing from
one end of the earth to the other was
you know always an iffy proposition yet
the cost of the vessel the crew the
insurance the provisions and last but
not least all this stuff of the highest
possible value that you could cram into
every available square inch of space
that could be more than Wanda $200,000
where the stuff may be more depending on
how many Spanish silver dollars were
loaded on board so you had to be a man
of substantial means in order to finance
an expedition like this
my fellow Americans familiar with their
early history might have heard of a guy
named Robert Morris no relation to
governor Morris though they were close
friends
he was probably the richest guy in
America when Paul Revere made his
midnight
ride along with Khayyam Salomon Robert
Morris was the main financier of George
Washington's Revolutionary Army he's
also the only guy who was a signatory to
not only the Declaration but the
Articles of Confederation and the
Constitution as well
he was also credited with being the
first one to use the dollar sign that we
were you know so familiar with he made
his fortune in a shipping business
Robert Morris was keen to explore these
deals that would involve trade with
China fate one day brought mr. John
Ledyard face to face with Robert Morris
Leonard was a Connecticut Yankee who
ended up in the employ of the British
Navy he was on board the HMS resolution
during the famous voyage of Captain
James Cook
Leonard was a tragic comic figure he was
the guy who first figured out when he
was briefly docked in Canton in the
service of the British that the Chinese
went gaga for North American furs
especially sea otter pelts they fetched
it very substantial premium and
apparently weren't easy to find in China
sea otter fur was the Chateau d'Yquem of
animal pelts
it was the softest most luxurious and
had the highest concentration of hairs
per square inch 1 million and even back
then a good sea otter Pelt would fetch
120 bucks that was back in the 18th
century led iord later wrote quote the
skins which do not cost the purchaser 6
pence sterling sold in China for $100
you know with this amazing knowledge
Ledyard made his way back to the US and
1782 and started shopping for a backer
to finance this idea he had it would
involve buying sea otter pelts in the US
Northwest and then you know sailing them
to China you know selling them at a vast
profit and then using the proceeds to
load up the vessel with you know the
usual porcelain lacquer ware tea and you
know anything else
could fetch top dollar in New York
Boston or Philadelphia let your new
first hand what the demand was for these
sea otter pelts
and in fact all furs in his search for a
backer he of course first went to New
York but you know only met a lot of
looky-loos nothing panned out he was
just another guy with a great idea but
no funding and he just couldn't find a
backer in 1783 he ended up getting
hooked up with Robert Morris and Philly
and the two of them decided to go into
business together on this venture the
plan was to put together three vessels
who would sail together around Cape Horn
and then one would head straight to
Canton and two vessels would go to the
Pacific Northwest and load up with furs
and then rendezvous with the third
vessel in Canton well all kinds of
headaches heartaches and setbacks and
sued and trying to pull this all
together as excited as Robert Morris was
to dive into the China trade he was up
to his eyeballs trying to get the new
nation's finances in order
Washington made him the superintendent
of Finance of the United States so he
was only watching this China venture
with half an eye he was committed though
and had written to one of the most
sacred of cows of the founding fathers
John Jay quote I'm sending some ships to
China to encourage others in the
adventurous pursuits of Commerce Robert
Morris was really thinking big but in
the end all the investors could muster
up was a single vessel 100 feet long and
28 feet wide 360 tons only and the
grandiose plans to go pick up all these
furs fell through and they ended up with
a completely different kind of a
shipping manifest instead led Gerdes
dreams went up in smoke the vessel was
laid in with a hundred and nineteen
thousand five hundred dollars worth of
lead cordage woollen cloth wine brandy
rum beaver furs and $20,000 in Spanish
species
International coin of the realm at that
time in addition to this they packed up
30 tonnes of ginseng from Pennsylvania
and Virginia this was a very interesting
story how the ginseng business started
but I'm wandering off on too many
tangents already so this vessel was
called the Empress of China captaining
this vessel was John Greene 47 years old
6 foot 4 and 300 pounds it was his job
to get the Empress of China to the port
of Whampoa in Canton and back safely to
the US East Coast the super cargo was
Samuel Shaw the super cargoes job was to
deal with the cargo to ensure its safety
and integrity to sell it and to use his
wits to make all the purchases wherever
they went
now although Shaw would mix with any
Chinese government officials in Canton
he was nonetheless appointed as a kind
of unofficial consul by the US Congress
before the Empress of China sets sail
there appeared in the Salem Gazette in
August of 1783 an article that announced
we hear that a ship is fitting out in
Boston for an intended voyage to China
that her cargo out in money and goods
will amount to a hundred and fifty
thousand dollars and that she will sail
the ensuing fall many eminent merchants
in different parts of the continent are
said to be interested in this first
adventure from the new world to the old
we have at an earlier period than the
most sanguine Whig could have expected
or ever hoped or than the most
inveterate Tory fared very pleasing
prospects of a very extensive commerce
with the most distant parts of the globe
on February 22nd 1784 the Empress of
China sailed down the East River past
the southern tip of Manhattan and
started heading in the direction of West
Africa the war of independence and only
ended six months before and
the last of British troops had only
vacated just a few months prior the
Empress of China headed southeast across
the Atlantic stopping first in Cape
Verde before heading towards the Cape of
Good Hope by July of 1784 they arrived
at the Sunda Strait that separated
Sumatra from Java it was a textbook
voyage low on drama and high on monotony
between the Sunda Strait and Canton was
about as pirate-infested a body of water
as there ever was but fortune smiled on
America's first vessel to sail these
seas they ran into the French naval ship
Triton packing 64 guns the well-armed
Triton kindly escorted the Empress of
China from you Bay that is now part of
you Joan :
National Park on the westernmost tip of
Java and Indonesia all the way to Canton
arriving there in August 1784 that's
where it all began August 1784 that's
the big bang moment when Joan make wine
she began next year will be 220 years
that's when la May came face to face for
the first time with La Jolla in China
many American privateers had come to
Canton before this but that was before
the new nation was established now for
the first time a vessel sailing under
the stars and stripes made its way up
the Pearl River estuary and when they
started running the gauntlet of toll
booths and officials with their hands
out they were given the once-over and
well they were just passed off as just
another group of grubby Englishmen
Samuel Sean John Green made it clear
they came from this this new country the
United States when America finally
bellied up to the bar and the Empress of
China lined itself up alongside the
other trading vessels everyone couldn't
have been more
welcoming and cordial however you know
despite keeping up appearances these
other traders all smelled potential
trouble right away the particular Quahog
merchants who got assigned to their case
either didn't get it right or didn't
want to deal with the hassle so when he
he handed in all the paperwork to the
hop Oh in Canton he just ticked the box
that said the Empress of China was a
British vessel as far as he could tell
he didn't notice any difference well
that's gonna cause some complications
later China's population back then was
about 300 million versus the United
States who had a population of about 2
million a roughly 1/2 a percent of
China's number we've narrowed the gap
since then let me quote from captain
greens log on Tuesday August 24th 1784 4
p.m. light winds from eastward came to
anchor with our best Bauer anchor in
Macao Road in 5 fathom the town of Macao
bearing west-northwest three miles
saluted the town with seven guns which
was returned by the fort mr. s Shah our
supercargo accompanied by mr. Swift
purser had the honor of hoisting the
first continental flag ever seen or made
use of in those seas at five a Chinese
boat came on board took down the ship's
name masters named quantity of men and
guns on board where from and of what
nation then left us the Chinese
officials didn't know what to make of
them these Americans there there was no
record of who these people were or their
country and the Chinese initially just
called them new people or even flowery
flag Devils when it was learned that
these new people showed up empty-handed
you know without any of the expected you
know ritual gifts they reprimanded these
Americans who told them don't come back
next time empty-handed and that the only
reason they were being let off the hook
was because it was their it was their
first time here there was no knowledge
of protocol
how the game worked they learned it by
the seat of their pants where to go and
Macau to get the customs permits then
how to deal with the permits required as
you passed the Bogue and then exactly
you know where to sail and Whampoa where
to line up you know which merchant would
handle their case I mentioned in
previous episodes that these these Co
Hong merchants had to pay a vast fortune
to get this position so he was out to
maximize his benefits
now here came Yankee Doodle Dandy fresh
meat
this first time visit by an American
vessel came a year after the failure of
the McCartney mission to Beijing and
during the final years of the Qianlong
Emperor's overly long reign the Empress
of China sailing the new American flag
lined up alongside the 21 British for
French for Dutch and for Danish vessels
that were docked there that was that was
a great moment of symbolism here was a
vessel flying a flag that waved proudly
in the wind next to the flags from the
other great and ancient nations it was
too early to tell and who knew at such
an early stage if this new country would
never amount to anything or offer up any
significant competition in those waters
well they'll find out later on that not
only did Americans sell to their own
home market they even busted in on the
British markets and in the West Indies
markets challenging the British even on
their home pitch it didn't take long
Samuel Shaw left us with many
interesting firsthand observations from
his journal as he slowly made his way to
the port
he gave a nice description of the scene
there he wrote the surface of the river
was thickly covered with vessels of
different sizes of singular forms and
rigging many of which were painted with
gay and fantastical colors here were
boats and small craft and great variety
with numerous junks of from 4 to 500
tons burthen covered with painted
figures and glaring hues of almost every
device that ingenuity could invent
all containing men women and children in
grotesque
garments huddled together in great
numbers and actively engaged in
different employments while the crash of
gongs in the home of business heard from
every quarter presented a scene full of
life and hilarity on September 14th 1784
one of the key rituals in the whole
trading theatre occurred when the ha PO
came to perform the measurement of the
Empress of China this would determine
the amount that would be extracted from
them and taxes and fees and this was
known as cumshaw and measurement cumshaw
you've all heard of I'm sure it's a
little like back Shh in the Middle East
the name means gold sands gene sha which
in mispronounced Cantonese is called the
gum Messiah which morphed into cumshaw
like gold dust but it was basically a
bribe offered up in the form of a gift
shop put it this way in his journal
quote at 10 a.m.
came on board the grand Mandarin with
his attendants and the principal
merchants of Canton to measure the ship
saluted them with nine guns the grand
Mandarin sent on board as a present to
the ship
two bulls eight bags of flour and seven
jars of country wine see this is where
the Americans blew it by not knowing how
the deal worked they were supposed to
show the hypo and he came on board all
the finest things they had and gifts
that they brought for him they were
supposed to lay everything out you know
in a nice little display and then the
hypo would pick out the stuff he wanted
for himself and it would be packed up
and then it would be you know sent to
his magnificent residence you know when
to keep up appearances
to show this wasn't a bribe the
foreigner was obliged to charge the hypo
for all these things but you know the
invoice would always be written at
perhaps 5% of its real value you know
this is how it worked the Americans had
a map and they were able to show the
Chinese authorities where exactly they
had come from geographically they had to
assure them they were they were not
British
not in the least and that there's was a
new and independent country so despite
showing up empty-handed without the
requisite gifts they were still allowed
to stay there with all the other
gathered traders and sell their cargo
and buy Chinese goods between September
and December 1784 one of the crew of the
Empress of China writing to his father
in letter wrote quote the Chinese had
never heard of us but we introduced
ourselves as a new nation gave them our
history with the description of our
country the importance and necessity of
trade here to the advantage of both
which they appear perfectly to
understand and wish unbeknownst to the
American supercargo Samuel Shaw in
between the time they left New York City
and the time they arrived at their space
along the dock the price of ginseng the
main commodity they were carrying had
tanked and their thirty tons was now
worth substantially less than what they
had anticipated the best and most prized
ginseng came from China's Northeast and
in Korea because of the massive Chinese
demand for the stuff imported ginseng
started making its way to China in the
1740s once word hit the street that the
Chinese liked the stuff the magical
powers of capitalism did their thing and
in no time at all everyone who could get
into the ginseng business did and the
price for imported ginseng went from
about fifteen dollars a pound in Canton
to you know a buck fifty to two and a
quarter a pound the American product
wasn't as prized as the ginseng you
could get up in Loughnane
Chile or North Korea but it was
certainly strongly in demand and
satisfied the market reminds me of the
time in 2000 or 2001 the outfit I was
with took a big position in the knockoff
razor scooter importing business about
15 minutes before the bottom fell out of
the market nonetheless everything got
sold and as was also the super cargoes
job he made all the purchases as well
dealing with the co Homer
chant the whole time of course and he
loaded up with 700 chests of Bo hey T Bo
HEA in Chinese this was a type of Wolong
called we cha they also bought a hundred
chests of Haissam tea that was also
known as Lucky Dragon was called a sheet
one chop it was a green tea from from on
way in addition to a hefty amount of
porcelain they also bought trousers made
from a material that was called nankeen
nankeen was just a 100% cotton fabric
that is the name suggests originally
came from a cotton plant from Nanjing
the color was a sort of yellow or buff
and that was its chief characteristic
later it was made everywhere and just
died in that color to give it that that
Nanking look it was a big China export
on May 11 1785 the Empress of China
arrived back where it had all started
sailing home up the East River after all
accounts were settled Robert Morris and
his fellow investors despite the bottom
falling out of the ginseng market made a
nice thirty thousand seven hundred
twenty seven dollar profit on the
venture which it was more than a twenty
five percent return on their initial
investment not bad
Bernie Madoff only got his investors
twelve percent after he got back the
super cargo of the Empress of China
Samuel Shaw Dooley wrote up all his
notes and recollections and reported to
John J as follows quote to every lover
of this country as well as those more
immediately concerned in its commerce it
must be a pleasing reflection that a
communication is thus happily opened
between us and the eastern extremity of
the globe John J replied to Shaw that
the US Congress felt quote a particular
satisfaction in the successful issue of
the first effort of the citizens of
America to establish direct trade with
China which does so much honor to its
Undertaker's and conductors word
traveled fast about the success of the
Empress of China and the profits it
brought its investors it was also taught
on the streets about how with this
achievement in China it showed how their
nation was emerging onto the world scene
although everything had been nice and
friendly during the first American visit
to China the British traders at once
began to circle the wagons and from here
on out the relations between American
and British traders were often anything
but cordial but you know this is way way
before Winston Churchill in 1946 with
the you know speech and the the special
relationship and everything the rush was
on it was written quote every little
village on every little Creek with a
sloop that could hold five Yankees was
now planning to embark upon the Far
Eastern trade between 1784 and 1814
around 300 American ships made 618
voyages to Guangzhou and this didn't
include the smuggling vessels a whole
new industry was suddenly born and
people rushed in and from this budding
China trade pioneered by the success of
the Empress of China came America's
first millionaires and multimillionaires
but once Americans came calling a China
they learned the same thing that
everyone else knew the Canton system
stacked the deck totally against the
foreign traders but despite all the
taxes fees bribes and various other
hidden costs the China trade was still
quite profitable one man who took the
lead in this emerging market was one
John Jacob Astor the first Prince of
China trade he began his business in
1800 and built a fur trading empire and
most of his profits came from offloading
these animal skins in China where they
fetched the highest prices he took a lot
of these profits and plowed them into
Manhattan real estate and other
investments we remember this man's
great-grandson John Jacob Astor the
fourth who tragically but bravely died
on the Titanic at the age of 47 the
Astra name of course is a great
and historic name in the annals of
American history Steven Gerrard was
another one who you know did
particularly well in the China trade
both Astor and especially Gerard as
Robert Morris did during the
Revolutionary War almost single-handedly
financed the American side in the war of
1812 these men who engaged in this trade
were the first American tycoons they did
especially well during the Napoleonic
Wars from 1792 to 1815 because you know
being neutral in all these American
vessels were less apt to fall prey to
French or British naval ships to
suddenly have this vast market available
couldn't have come at a better time for
the United States the ripple effect of
this china trade that ran up and down
the whole US economy was felt everywhere
you know for example the shipbuilding
industry was massively affected when
this in turn employed thousands upon
thousands in the shipbuilding and
shipping industry in addition to this
there were all the suppliers to this
industry to wealth was created and from
this wealth the American economy began
to pick up some steam aside from
jin-sang furs and silver the Americans
in the early 1790s found a fourth thing
that the Chinese market had quite the
demand for and this was sandalwood came
from Hawaii Sandwich Islands later on
this resource also was discovered in
Fiji
that's where American vessels packed
with sea otter pelts sailing from West
Coast ports would stop to you know stock
up on provisions before making the the
final beeline to the South China Sea
whatever empty cargo space remained they
top it off with sandalwood and you got
to believe trying to satisfy Chinese
demand for sea otter furs and any skins
from fur seals and in all the sandalwood
it had a huge impact on the whole
ecology of the region a forests were cut
down to the last tree
so many fur seals and otters had been
trapped that they began to become scarce
and you know it threw the whole
ecosystem into disarray they needed
something else to narrow the trade gap
and of course you know what that's gonna
be when Samuel Shaw spent his several
months in Canton he observed the whole
opium trade close up he saw what the
demand was and the kind of profits that
could be had and trading in these chests
of opium so the Americans being an
enterprising lot got into the opium
business in 1804 some serious
trafficking started going on now you're
probably wondering how do they get ahold
of opium then they'd all come from India
well not exactly the Americans found
their own supply this was in Turkey they
picked it up in his mirror at 250 a
pound and it fetched 10 bucks a pound in
Canton the Turkish opium was not as fine
as the Indian stuff but it certainly did
the trick got these Chinese smokers high
the American sort of dealt with the
opium business in a similar fashion as
the East India Company the shipping
companies didn't handle it themselves
personally the actual job of shipping it
to China and selling it went to these
third-party vessels you know some
smuggler probably and let me just add
the Americans were small-time petty
dealers and opium compared to the
British now you'd think with all the
ginseng furs sandalwood and opium that
the Americans would have a nice
favorable balance of trade well this
didn't happen that's how huge the demand
was back in the States
for Chinese products if they sold a
hundred and fifty thousand dollars in
goods to the Chinese and picked up two
hundred thousand dollars worth of stuff
in Canton that balanced 50 grand had to
be covered in silver that is Spanish
dollars and pieces of AIDS the global
currency of its day sixty five to
seventy five percent of US imports were
paid for in silver so this whole
hot-button
issue of the trade deficit with China
goes back 200 years ago it's interesting
to note that the whole business of OAM
manufacturing in China had also already
begun this is where a factory will
manufacture something or other according
to the design and specifications given
to them by a customer this is more or
less the business I've been involved in
for a quarter century and not content
just to buy Chinese design porcelain the
enterprising American traders would
bring their own designs to these Chinese
and ask them to make these you know
whatever porcelain dishes or this tea
service or whatever using American motif
designs that they you know brought with
them and then Chinese would take the
order manufacture it and sell it to them
made in China porcelain with perhaps you
know an image of George Washington or
you know the American flag between 1784
and the Terra Nova incident of 1821
us-china relations were played out on
the docks of Whampoa the Americans were
rather content to sit back and let
Britain do all the dirty work of pushing
China around and softening them up to
get them to open up more ports in these
first decades the whole matter of
China's relationship with the US was all
measured through the prism of Commerce I
mentioned the Terra Nova incident that
was the first diplomatic incident that
happened between the US and China some
poor guy named Francis Terra Nova was on
board an American vessel in Canton and
threw a jar or something overboard and
it hit a Chinese boat woman it was
unfortunately right in harm's way the
thing hit her in the head and knocked
her in the water and she drowned
as far as Chinese law went at that time
during the Qing Dynasty there was no
differentiation made between a death
caused by accident and one caused by
malicious intent as far as Chinese law
was concerned same thing American law
made the differentiation so that was the
rub back in 1821 and a good
old-fashioned standoff ensued
but in the end facing the prospect of
not being allowed to trade with China
the American side had no choice but to
hand Frances terranova over to the
Chinese authorities and he was dealt a
little Chinese justice the us-china
relationship however survived the
Terranova incident okay
the Americans already knew how this was
gonna play out because the Empress of
China was in Canton between November
24th and December 6 1784 when the lady
Hughes affair went down this was a
British ship that got entangled in a
similar predicament one of their Gunners
when firing a salute as commanded
accidentally blew away two Chinese who
were unexpectedly passing through harm's
way
the Chinese demanded the British offer
this gunner up yeah there was the usual
standoff and huffing and puffing and the
Chinese slapped an embargo and all
British ships and finally after
realizing that the Chinese officials
were holding all the Aces the lady
Hughes surrendered the guy who was
shortly thereafter executed but remember
the lazy Quahog merchant I mentioned
earlier who who registered the Empress
of China with the ha PO is a British
vessel
well the Empress of China ended up
getting caught up in the embargo too
which was only meant to affect the
British country ships from India Samuel
Shaw and another key player in this
venture who I haven't mentioned Thomas
Randolph appealed to the French consul
to advocate on their behalf and they
wrote sir the undersigned super cargoes
for the American Commerce in China beg
leave to acquaint you that they have
undoubted reason to believe that through
the misrepresentation of our Quahog
merchants were reported to the Hopf Oh
as being Englishmen and the ship in
which they arrived at this place as an
English country ship and consequently
that they should be considered subjects
of Great Britain to take off from this
misrepresentation and to announce to the
Chinese that we are the subjects of a
free independent and sovereign power
is the reason of our present application
and we request in the name of the United
States of America the allies and good
friends of his most Christian Majesty
that you will cause to be made known to
the Chinese that we are Americans a free
and independent and sovereign nation not
connected with Great Britain nor owing
allegiance to her or any other power on
earth but to the authority of the United
States alone and that we pray the
Chinese to consider us in that view and
grant us our passports accordingly the
United States continue to follow the
policy of maintaining a steady course
with China trade allowing Britain to do
all the heavy lifting and just followed
their lead you know of course we're all
this is heading the 1830s the opium war
is going to happen and when Britain and
China inked that most famous or infamous
of the bull Pingdom Kalia the unequal
treaties it's gonna freak American
traders out they saw how Britain ran
this treaty down China's throat and now
they had five more ports to sail to
extraterritoriality and all the usual
imperialist demands the United States
government perceived this as a threat
that would put Britain in the position
they have a leg up on all us-china
Commerce the traders saw nothing good in
this for them and they'd be the most
money dove the moneyed class leaned hard
on their congressmen and whoever else
they had access to and said something
has to be done about this the American
traders wanted the same exact benefits
that Britain got but in order to do that
they had to go to China and negotiate
this and up to this point the United
States relatively speaking even in 1840
was still a new country although the
economy was growing by leaps and bounds
they still didn't have the ability to
maintain overseas diplomatic posts or to
project power in any way this was a
pretty big step to consider going to
China to sign a treaty this is where
caleb Cushing enters our story he was
from Massachusetts where most of the
China traders were based he was their
guy if that wasn't enough
Cushing's father had moved out to the
Pacific Northwest to Oregon and he was
knee-deep in the China trade and so in
the 1830s Caleb Cushing with his
father's interests in mind and the
interests of all these Massachusetts
China traders he represented became the
first person in the US government to
advocate for the establishment of some
kind of official relations with China up
to now going back to the Empress of
China there was still nothing the two
countries traded goods but no
ambassadors had been exchanged and no
treaties had been entered into Caleb
Cushing had two big friends in
Washington one was the tenth President
of the United States
yes his accident see himself John Tyler
the other was the Secretary of State
Daniel Webster those two looked at
Cushing as their China expert you know
and knowing how to talk to talk he was
it was very influential over them when
it came to that whole subject of China
trade in addition to serving as a US
congressman during Tyler's
administration Caleb Cushing would later
serve as Attorney General under the 14th
President Franklin Pierce once the
Treaty of Nanjing happened
Cushing really turned up the heat and
said the United States government had to
do something or else it would adversely
affect the interests of American trade
in China he vehement lee argued that
quote if the United States did not act
in the Far East the British would seize
Japan and Hawaii giving them control of
the Pacific to the immense future peril
not only of our territory possessions
but all our vast commerce on the Pacific
but in 1843 with the terms of the Treaty
of Nanjing reverberating around the coal
at Washington Tyler nominated Cushing as
commissioner and US ambassador to China
in China this was during the final years
of the historically unlucky Bal Quang
Emperor all the way up to 1857 the u.s.
was represented in China by these
commissioners like Cushing rather than
you know full fledged ambassadors there
wasn't any system in place yet to handle
this kind of formal diplomatic
arrangement so lacking credentials for
now Caleb Cushing was only an envoy
rather than an ambassador so with
Cushing's influence John Tyler now
announced that official US policy from
now on considered the Pacific Ocean and
Hawaii to be within the sphere of US
influence the feeling around Washington
was that these actions would counter any
kind of threat to the possible British
monopolization of the China market tyler
requested funding from the congress to
pay for a full-time commissioner to
reside in china to look after american
interests there Tyler receives support
from even one of his political enemies
the 6th President of the United States
John Quincy Adams Adams had said that
this proposed mission would quote
provide the means of future intercourse
between the United States government and
the government of China the issue was
debated in Congress in February of 1843
the house ended up passing the bill
voting 96 to 59 in support Daniel
Webster who used his formidable
influence to push this bill forward
after passing declared it would be the
quote most important mission in history
and 129 years later Nixon would call his
visit to the Middle Kingdom the week
that changed the world well you could
always rely on us Americans to come up
with these superlatives well the mission
went ahead and the upshot to all this is
the Treaty of one shot president Tyler's
Commissioner an envoy extraordinary and
Minister
plenipotentiary of the united states for
china caleb Cushing and his entourage
sailed to Macao and there he met with
his counterpart
ching-ching of the you know Imperial
House of DA Ching was also Guardian of
the heir apparent governor-general of
the two guang's
and superintendent General of the trade
and foreign intercourse of the five
ports he was a Manchu from the royal
family who goes down in history as the
signer not only of the Treaty of Nanjing
but this one at one shot with the
Americans and the Treaty of Whampoa with
the French and the Treaty of Canton with
Sweden and Norway so he gets the dubious
distinction of being the signer of all
four of the unequal treaties that
followed the disastrous defeat in the
opium war I already added him to my list
of future topics no need to get into
what happened next we all know from this
point forward until liberation in 1949
China is gonna suffer one humiliation
and loss of face after another
Huang Xiao is located in Macau in the
northeast part the actual treaty itself
was signed at the guanine temple or the
guanine tong which previously was known
as the pool each on yet it's still there
today if you want to visit and the
treaty was inked on the 3rd of July in
the year of our Lord Jesus Christ 1844
in the 24th year 5th month an 18th day
of the reign of dal Kwang article 1 went
like this quote there shall be a perfect
permanent and universal peace and a
sincere and cordial Amity between the
United States of America on the one part
and the da Ching Empire on the other
part and between their people
respectively
without exception of persons or places
you know that part was ok good way to
start us-china official relations but
the other 33 clauses in the treaty
pretty much echoed everything
that was contained in the Treaty of
Nanjing plus a couple other conditions
such as you know allowing for Protestant
missionaries in China and their
protection and also from now on it was
okay to hire tutors and to learn Chinese
language you know Mandarin without the
risk of getting executed so with the
Treaty of Wong's sha unequal as it was
America and China entered into their
first official diplomatic exchange to
show their sincerity the American side
came out against the dealing of opium
article 33 stated citizens of the United
States who shall attempt to trade
clandestinely with such of the ports of
China as are not open to foreign
commerce or who shall trade in opium or
any other contraband articles of
merchandise shall be subject to be dealt
with by the Chinese government without
being entitled to any countenance or
protection from that of the United
States but article 21 of the treaty sort
of made a mockery of that when it stated
quote subjects of China who may be
guilty of any criminal act towards
citizens of the United States shall be
arrested and punished by the Chinese
authorities according to the laws of
China and the citizens of the United
States who may commit any crime in China
shall be subject to be tried and
punished only by the console or other
public functionary of the United States
thereto authorized according to the laws
of the United States and in order to the
prevention of all controversy and
disaffection justice shall be equitable
and impartially administered on both
sides ah good old extraterritoriality
those were the days now some including
the american dean of chinese studies
john king Fairbank himself said this
treaty didn't really constitute any kind
of us-china policy real us-china
relations didn't begin until later on in
1898 when William Woodville Rockhill
proclaimed quote all
nations including the United States
could enjoy equal access to the China
market this essentially was his call for
America's so-called open door policy and
Rock Hill is considered the father of
that policy two things led to this first
was you know Japan's defeat of China in
the first sino-japanese war and then
America's acquisition of the Philippines
following the spanish-american war in
1898 the fear in the u.s. was that China
was simply going to be partitioned by
Japan Britain and others and this wasn't
gonna be good for us China trade so this
open-door policy was meant to protect
American business interests there once
we had our feet firmly planted in the
Philippines this gave us a nice
convenient base from which to have a
much larger voice and presence in China
and it's at this point that John King
Fairbanks says us-china policy you know
really began William would fill Rock
Hill by the way aside from being a
fluent Mandarin speaker was also the
first American to study and learn how to
speak Tibetan and is considered the
father of Tibetan Studies here in the US
he was also our guy in Beijing when it
came time to get to negotiate the Boxer
protocols he's a great late 19th century
diplomat who had a big impact on our
China policy and isn't terribly well
known which also makes him fodder as a
future China history podcast episode and
so my fine friends that is the story
about the earliest days when Jung and
May first started mingling and getting
to know one another in China I have to
admit after finishing off that yelu oppo
Chi episode last time I was I was at a
loss where to go from there
then with everybody in town from the
Ning ballhead office and you know doing
one of those coast-to-coast
deals it was it was hard to focus I
my long list of topics and just wasn't
getting any inspiration at all then my I
caught this book on my shelf it was Eric
J Dolan's when America first met China
this book came out in 2012 it was
published by liver write publishing I
download podcasts that I never listened
to not yet anyway and I buy all these
China related books on Amazon that just
pile up unread you know and this was one
of them so I thought this would be a
good topic
the genesis of us-china foreign
relations how did that all begin and
what were the circumstances when the
newest country in the world first came
calling - the oldest country in the
world Eric J Dolan's book is fantastic
and it's filled with great information
so I'm surprised it took me this long to
take it off the shelf of my ever
expanding China history podcast
reference library glad I did this
because it really is a great story the
very humble beginnings of us-china
relations I also ordered from Amazon the
Empress of China by Philip Chadwick
Foster Smith these two volumes combined
will offer you I think every possible
conceivable nugget and crumb of
information that you could ever hope to
know about the voyage trials and
tribulations of the Empress of China and
everyone who was associated with this
venture
there were rogues galore I only
scratched the top of the surface and I
heartily recommend both these books
this is Lazlo Montgomery signing off
from Claremont California it's been grey
and cold out this past week but
beautiful today but anyway cold is a
relative thing I guess a Viger was here
from Frederick's Todd in Norway I
suppose he'd be walking around in shorts
I have three layers on right now well to
all my fellow American skis here in the
home of the brave and to all American
expats all over this watered world a
happy Thanksgiving Ghana and Chia quello
take care everyone and I hope
see you next time for another exciting
episode of the China history podcast